Okay, go ahead.
The third one.
He's the first person to create a non-Roman form of Christianity.
Now, you've told me that you're Greek.
I mean, you realize that whether it was Rome in the sense of the Latin West or Constantinople in the Greek East, they were all Romans.
They saw themselves as citizens of the Roman Empire.
There was the Latin Empire and there was the Greek Empire.
But beyond both of those, the first enculturation that we are aware of outside of the Empire is Patricks.
He is the first person who has to figure out how to build Christianity or plant Christianity in a non-Roman culture.
And the way he did it
shows, I think, his immense creativity.
He didn't try to bring all the Roman trappings with him.
He reduced Christianity once again to the Gospel and planted it in Ireland, and what blossomed was a much more freewheeling, diverse, purposefully diverse Christianity than the Romans would ever have allowed.
Would you describe this book as a labor of love for you?
Give me a little bit of your biographical.
I mean, your surname certainly suggests a vested interest in the subject.
Well, all my grandparents were Irish-born.
They were all immigrants to this country.
I only knew one of them.
Three of them died before I was born.
I'm hanging out with a precise situation.
Four grandparents from Greece, and I only knew one.
But what's interesting is the great melting pot.
Which leaves you sort of feeling as if something's been left out.
There's a link missing there that you'd like to know about.
I can't even explain it, but from the time I was a little kid.
Growing up where, by the way?
In the Bronx.
Okay, so you're a New Yorker.
Right.
From the time I was a little kid, I always felt... My mother, whom I mentioned, she's now dead, used to tell these stories and sing these songs that had been taught to her by her mother, whom I never knew, who was from Galway.
And...
I was always, they always held an immense fascination for me, which I wouldn't even try to explain.
Even now, when I think of some of those things, I can hardly talk.
A big way.
I just feel overcome.
Was a sense of your Irishness passed on to you by your parents?
I suppose, but I don't think they would, you know, they didn't, they were not, it wasn't of the green beer variety.
I was going to say, what did you do on St.
Patrick's Day?
Not necessarily all that much.
It wasn't a St.
Patrick's Day thing.
It was much more, what I remember are these stories and songs and sayings.
It was more of an intellectual appreciation, shall we say.
No, I'm not even sure.
I wouldn't say it was intellectual.
It was extremely heartfelt.
Intellectual would do quite, but it was enveloping, and it grabbed you.
And it was almost like an alternative scripture or a...
Yeah.
Okay, you went to Fordham, I guess?
Is that right?
I did.
I'm deducing that from all the Fordham brothers that you mentioned.
Yeah, I was fortunate enough to be educated by Jesuits at a time when they still insisted that everybody read Latin and Greek.
Too bad they still don't.
Well, I think so.
I mean, I think they gave up just when they... Oh, I'm a hardliner.
Did you read Harold Bloom's book?
Uh-huh.
I mean, there's a lot in there to agree with.
I'm not asking for a comment on it, but I really... Anyway, go ahead.
I'm sorry.
No, I think that we've made terrible mistakes in this regard.
I'm all for multiculturalism.
In fact, I think that my book is a form of multiculturalism.
It's insisting that the Irish have been left out.
On an earlier radio program, somebody said, well, of course you mean that they saved Western civilization, not civilization.
Oh, great.
And I said, well, no, actually I mean they saved civilization.
It's not like civilization is a choice.
it's not as if you know it's a smorgasbord and we pass by and we say i think i'll have a little chinese civilization and i think i'll have a little um a little uh saudi arabian civilization and you know we the only civilization that we can be a part of is western civilization so it is civilization for us uh that doesn't mean that there can't be new ingredients there always are new ingredients but still it's one uh plant
And so as far as the Irish were concerned, they saved civilization.
They saved the only civilization there was or that could be called by that name in that time and that place.
By those people.
Yeah, but you know, it's still, you can't, but if you think about it, civilization is not a choice.
It's not like deciding what kind of clothes you're going to wear.
It's not something to be,
to be put on and taken off at will.
It goes much more deeply than that.
Did that satisfy the questioner?
Of course not.
Multiculturalism can bring its own form of blindness.
Go ahead.
Continue, sir.
That's it.
I don't know.
I don't have much more than that.
Okay.
We were talking again about your own... And looking at the books, the other books that you've done, there does seem to be a preponderance of effort.
to your Irish heritage, your interest certainly in Irish literature.
Well, I'm doing the Jews next.
Are you?
Yes.
I just finished a proposal for a book to be called The Gifts of the Jews.
They have a Jew-safe civilization.
Exactly.
That's all my Jewish friends.
I'm going from the... I'm going to take...
I'm going to take care of the genes.
That would work.
You know, I handled in the course of the research for my book, you talk about
Christianity being 500 years old.
One of the people I profile in my book is William Scheide out in Princeton, New Jersey, who has arguably the finest library of private hands in North America.
He's the only individual who owns a Gutenberg Bible, which I handle, which was a kick.
But he went to his safe and brought out this 5th century codex.
Really?
In Coptic, and it is a complete Gospel of Matthew.
Wow.
And I think it's, you know, among the fourth oldest surviving sources.
of the Gospel of Matthew.
Imagine that, and it's in Coptic, and he went through it.
I described this.
In fact, it's in its original binding of beveled wooden boards with still some of the original leather.
Yeah, amazing.
The Copts, actually, I left out the Ethiopians out of all this because I wasn't quite sure how to bring them in, but like Ireland, Ethiopia is a non-Roman
culture onto which Christianity is grafted.
Now, it's different in many ways.
It had a lot of ties to the Jews.
And so it was kind of part of, you could almost say it was part of Mediterranean culture.
It's not quite as wild and crazy as trying to graft Christianity onto Ireland.
But there are still some, there are many interesting parallels, and I would love to study that sometime.
I don't know Copped, but I'd love to learn.
It looks a lot like Greek, actually.
Yeah, I imagine that it is similar in certain ways.
And I think that the parallels might be interesting.
Yeah.
But the odd thing about the cops is that we have no name of an apostle.
We don't know who did it.
Yeah.
I just called up on my computer the page.
And he's describing, we go to the colophon of this codex, and he says, imagine that is an M right there, and take my word for it if you try hard.
The letter next to it is an A. And then this circle with a little line through it, that's a theta, which means th.
Then there's an A-I-O, and that C would be used as an S. I'm just quoting Mr. Scheider here.
So what that means is Matthäus, Matthew, you see.
And before that comes the word kata, which means according to Matthew.
And this word up here is the word for gospel, evangelion, the evangel, where the word evangelist comes from.
So what you have here is a complete 5th century Coptic man, and we're handling this, you know.
That's Greek, what you're just saying.
That's exactly right.
That's what he's showing me, and he's reading it to me, you know.
And as we were talking, he called it up on the computer.
But anyway, you know, I'm hopeful.
We're going now to...
I just closed on the galleys two weeks ago in my book, and I'm getting the bound galleys.
I don't know when.
I don't know how long.
What's the turnaround to urine publishing?
If we closed the galleys on the 17th of February, normally when would you expect to see bound galleys?
A month after that probably?
two months?
No, no, a month.
Something more like a month.
Yeah.
Well, I still have one more.
I'd like to, you know, I don't know, maybe I can get a footnote in here.
I would like to credit your book.
I'm advertising my book as, unlike your book, which you don't go in for a large bibliography.
You might just address yourself to that briefly.
Why?
Yeah.
I love bibliographies.
I said why, because I can never figure out what
was really useful to someone.
I read an awful lot more, needless to say, than the intention.
I'd have to have.
I couldn't possibly have done it any other way.
But an awful lot of what you read, you don't find useful.
It's only the few little nuggets that you really find useful.
So I just thought that for a book of this kind, which is not a scholarly book, but based on other people's scholarship, I would limit myself to the things that I really did find useful.
Plain why I found them useful, so that a reader, especially I think an uninitiated reader, might actually use some of them.
A woman here who read the bound galleys, somebody from the international division said, I want to tell you that I'm reading the Aeneid, and that's thanks to your book.
It never occurred to me to try it before.
So much for liberal education.
Well, I was very happy to hear that.
I really felt I had succeeded with something.
That's exactly the kind of thing I would like to do.
I would love that this book lead every reader to at least one other book.
And I don't particularly care what the other book is.
Good quote, good quote.
I like that.
I'm looking for my sound bites here.
Oh, all right.
That's good.
And so it's with that in mind...
that I limited the bibliography.
Well, you said just a few minutes ago that you did not perceive this, and you do not perceive this as a scholarly book.
So your target audience then is the general reader, right?
My assumption.
I really have that in mind.
There certainly are assertions in here that are original.
All the stuff I just said about Patrick, I have never seen anybody else say.
I think it's all...
extremely defensible from the remaining text, but nobody else has ever said it.
And I've never seen anywhere the claim that he was the first person to condemn slavery, but all you have to do is read
his letters to Carotacus to know that he did.
Yeah.
But no one has ever thought of it in that context.
I'm just so scared when you say the first and the only.
There's going to be somebody out there that's going to come up with, you know, just my... I'm waiting.
I wish you'd have couched it just to... I'm waiting.
Hedged it a tad, you know.
I don't, you know, I do know a lot about this period, and I, you know, I am a sort of...
amateur student of history, and I think, I don't think anybody's going to come up with anything.
That's great.
That actually means anything.
What's the first printing?
You mean how many?
Yeah.
Well, I think we're in our third printing.
We're up to about 25,000.
Really?
Good for you.
I mean, you're two weeks away from pub date.
Right.
I'm just looking.
Yeah, mine's a first edition.
Good.
I care about these things.
I have to go because I have another... Well, we did fine.
I have another thing downtown.
Well, give me your phone number, will you, Case?
Please.
Will you give me your phone number?
212.
Let me just... Okay, 212.
782-9762.
9762.
Okay, good.
I review often for the L.A.
Times.
I used to review a lot.
I don't do as much now.
I don't have the time.
But I would really like to see your book with a view toward that.
That would be wonderful.
I have a whole California channel.
I'm going to shut up for tape recording.